---
title: How to build Embedded Systems Consulting business?
abstract: At some point in engineer career consider we may consider building our own consulting business.
          In following blog post I share experience that I gained building 3mdeb Embedded Systems Consulting.
cover: /covers/3mdeb-logo_simple-color.png
author: piotr.krol
layout: post
published: true
date: 2019-07-04
archives: "2019"

tags:
  - embedded
  - consulting
categories:
  - Miscellaneous

---

## Introduction

__NOTE__: Following content was initially edited and published in [Elektor 10/2018](https://www.elektormagazine.com/magazine/elektor-75/42164).

Every engineer at some point in career wonder about taking everything in
her/his own hands and starting work as independent freelancer or consultant.
When that thought got to me first time I was working for big international
corporation and I was naive enough to think that I can organize things much
better. Sadly there are not many sources where you can read how to start and
navigate through first year or so. It is hard to not mention here embedded
systems guru Jack Ganssle and his classical  [Guide to Being an Embedded Consultant](http://www.ganssle.com/item/becoming-a-consultant.htm),
which was motivation to me and must read for anyone thinking about change.

In following article I describe my path to building Embedded System Consulting
company and problems I faced when building organization.

I silently assume you have decent experience in embedded systems or related
field and considering change in your career. Below consideration are rather for
engineers starting solo who would like to know how to start and how the
everyday operation may look like.

## Dream

Reality is usually much different than our expectations. That’s why I recommend
to try things before making the move. Before I made decision of leaving
corporate world I worked for over 6 months part time as freelancer through
various popular websites. Thanks to that experience I faced all critical parts
of business that can be new to engineers from embedded systems field:

* Customer relationship - explaining technical things in non-technical way is
  crucial, helping understand what can and cannot be done
* Project planning and estimation - impossible to learn in theory, requires a
  lot of practice
* Pipeline filling - no new customers means no paycheck next month
* Legal, accounting, marketing

Of course key engineering work have to be done on time despite all problems
that enumerated areas may bring. Overall consultant or freelancer get rid of
corporate processes, but have to built their own to make things stable for time
longer then couple months.

Initially I thought that it would be possible to avoid processes, but building
business requires solid structures which cannot be destroyed by minor change on
market. It is important to understand Embedded Systems Consulting may bring a
lot of unexpected issues, but if you can navigate and stabilize that kind of
business reward can be worth the effort.

## From Dream to Action

There are still tons of questions to answer, but most important at this point
is to start work for yourself, what means either paid project from some
customer or project that will help you promote your profile. Key questions that
should build framework are:

* How much time I can spend on side projects during week/month?
* Does my contract allow working for other people/companies?
* What are the technology areas that are most interesting to me?

First point you should consult with your family and friends. Amount of time
and hours you working should be clearly defined (e.g. Mon-Fri: 9am-5pm -
regular work, 8pm-midnight - side project) . Please note that working 8h in
regular job and then additional couple hours on side projects, can be
exhaustive, so you should remember about healthy style basics and be reasonable
about pushing the limits. Time management is very important, so make sure you
loose as less as possible in traffic, ability to work remotely can really help
here. If you work over hours for your current employer you should spent this
time on your side projects.

You should consult your contract with lawyer, in some states employers cannot
forbid additional professional activity. Some contracts obligate you to ask
employer for permission, please note that you can be rejected and to proceed
you will have to change your job. Rethinking your tactics twice before talking
with manager is very important. In any case you have to avoid conflict of
interest.

There are tons of technologies used in embedded systems area, so you have to
choose something. My initial idea was to understand all development kits I had
on shelves. It may be worth to look at market and see which projects are high
value without much attention from freelancers. Also you can’t be wrong with
Arduino and Raspberry Pi, but please note that market for those boards is huge
and rates are very low - unless you do something exceptional. To summarize
please choose technologies that you could work on without being paid for and
start work and document your effort.

## Profile

I think one of the first thing, in our digitized reality with hundreds of
social media channels, is building your own profile. There are tons of books
about personal branding and building your Internet presence. Typically at
beginning we don’t have idea of brand and we stick with our own name around
which we building reputation.

What is important to realize is that there are limits to size of project that
single person can handle, depending on your business experience you may decide
to address that problem at beginning or wait to cross that bridge when get
there.

### What you need to build good profile?

* Profile overview - some introduction that would be read by potential customer
and give feeling what kind of work she/he may expect from you.

* Sample projects - key rule should be “always document your work” since you
never know when it can help you gain traction. Pictures and short description
of project with used technologies is something what can drive customers. Please
note that project documentation is your key marketing material - better you can
create better customers your will attract.

* Visibility - it should be easy to find you, make you are available through
freelancing websites, professional profile website as well as Stack Overflow
and forums related to your expertise.

Profile containing above characteristics should be consistent across various
social media and can build good ground for your personal website. It is good to
consider writing blog and being active in social media since those are
reasonably inexpensive marketing methods.

## Mechanics

Let’s assume you followed above advices and you prepared your profile and
published it on most important freelance websites. What now?

There are 2 main strategies, either you bid everything what fall in your area
of expertise, either you wait for being invited. You have to master interaction
through given freelancing service and understand all its pros and cons. It is
important to have some badges that prove your skill set as well as earning
reputation through activity. I was lucky enough to have got most of my project
through direct invitation. Personally I never bid projects that I was not 100%
sure I can finish below the budget and on time - those projects were typically
things that I accomplished many times and I already had everything solved in my
head.

Sooner or later you should get your first customer. Without going deep in
project management field we can distinguish 3 main project phases: on-boarding,
execution and closing.

On-boarding is the phase where engineers made the most mistakes. Incorrectly
handled relation, lack of process, over-optimistic pricing and delivery dates,
all that give terrible results. That is why I operate using following rules:

* Always have introductory call with new customer - if customer do not have
  time to talk about project it is bad sign.
* Never perform complex project estimates without being paid - typically
embedded systems projects are complex and analysis take significant amount of
time, because of that estimates preparation is project in itself which prove
basic concept and feasibility of further activities. I believe this point
itself could easily take whole article, but we don’t have space to dive deep
into it.
* Never provide estimates without having hardware (or at least development
board on which target hardware was based) on your desk - we all know how
embedded systems development can be surprising: buggy designs, insufficient
documentation or lack of vendor support, we faced that before. Adding one more
possible point of failure by committing to hardware platform that we have no
hands-on experience is way too much and may easily destroy our brand.
* Be honest about project idea and what is reasonable with provided resources, do
not forget to write down limitations - it is easy to enter not well defined
project, but closing that project without failure and financial consequences
may be impossible.

Above rules should help in on-boarding process, but then we have execution
phase. This stage requires correct communication adjusted to customer needs.
Communication is something that most engineers may have problem with it:
requires patiency, understanding and clear mind to address all issues without
causing more problems. Soft-skills is something we may have problem with that’s
why we should train a lot, always look for solutions, ask more experienced
friends and never give up.

Execution phase is the time when we use our key technical skills. We should
remember that good engineers always take notes and prepare documentation. If we
are serious about our Embedded Systems Consultant career we should never ignore
problems, any limitation should be provided to customer and clearly explained.
Documentation of operational technology (e.g. how to get, build and deploy
embedded software) for customer may be even more important, then correct
functions description in header files. We should always improve our execution
by using modern development techniques and efficient tools.

Finally we have to close the project. If previous phases where addressed
correctly we should have nicely packaged result of our work, that can be
utilized by consumer without much hassle. I never saw embedded software project
finished without limitations or things that could be improved. Delivery of
release package is very important because this is key factor based on which
customer will rate your service. Based on customer rate you may get free
marketing and/or new projects. 3mdeb reports typically contain initial project
scope document, release notes mentioning all features implemented and
limitations, user documentation defining easiest possible way to utilize
project results, other deliverables like source code or binaries.

## Business Tips

The non-engineering, business side of consulting can seem daunting. But it
doesn't have to be. Here are a few simple tips to keep in mind as you start
your own consulting business:

* Be an engineer. Remember that you are first and foremost an
engineer/programmer, not an accountant, lawyer, or bookkeeper. Focus on your
strengths, and don't be afraid to find accounting, bookkeeping, legal, and
business support early on that is, as soon as you start your consulting
business. There are plenty of resources online to help you get started. And
talking one-on-one with a business professional in the early stages of your
endeavor will make starting and running your consulting business easier than
trying to troubleshoot problems later down the road while you're working on
actual engineering-related projects. Freelancing portals typically handle most
of those problems for you, of course you have to agree to their rates at
beginning.

* If you work without third party between you and customer, then use contracts.
It's important to use written contracts and Scope of Work/Statement of Work
(SOW) statements clearly define project or services you will perform. Creating
correct project charter is the art in itself and there are online courses that
can help you doing that correctly. In short make sure both you and customers
agree up on project/service:
    * Goals
    * Scope and out of scope activities
    * Your and customer responsibilities
    * Requirements - ideally defined using RFC 2119 terminology
    * Execution procedure
    * Deliverables

In addition you may add assumptions and constraints that you know of as well as
risks related with various project requirements.

## Conclusion

In above article I just scratched the surface of real life of Embedded Systems
Consultant. It is very hard to digest 4 years of experience in one article, so
in some places you may see simplification and shortcuts. Overall I covered how
your dream may differ from reality, what are the key things to remember when
making move, timing, mechanics and approaches for transition between regular
engineering position and independent consulting.

## Summary

Overall I think we should understand why we make a move and what difference we
want to bring to world. If our only motivation are money, then IMO it is not
good enough since we can lose fuel when we will have enough.

In 3mdeb our mission is to make firmware world more open and accessible to
everyone. We believe that world with open ecosystem for embedded firmware
development would be better.

Think about your motivation before making move.

If you think we can help you in building your business by any means. Or you
simply looking for good partner that can provide embedded firmware for your
solution, feel free to [book a call with us](https://calendly.com/3mdeb/consulting-remote-meeting) or drop us email to
`contact<at>3mdeb<dot>com`. If you are interested in similar content feel free
to [sing up to our newsletter](http://eepurl.com/gfoekD)
