---
title: Qubes OS and 3mdeb 'minisummit' 2020
abstract: 'Once again, we will meet on QubesOs & 3mdeb minisummit 2020 discussing #QubesOS,
 #firmware, #coreboot, #security and #TPM related topics. All the event details are presented in the following blog post.'
cover: /covers/qubes&3mdeb_logo.png
author: kamila.banecka
layout: post
published: true
date: 2020-05-15
archives: "2020"

tags:
  - QubesOS
  - minisummit
  - live
  - youTube
  - firmware
  - coreboot
  - security
  - TPM
categories:
  - Miscellaneous
  - Security
  - Firmware


---
**Update (06/02/2020)**: Video recordings have been added to the agenda.

Previous Qubes OS 'minisummit'
[2019](https://blog.3mdeb.com/2019/2019-08-07-qubes-os-and-3mdeb-minisummit/)
turned out to be fruitful and productive event. Great piece of knowledge has
been presented and many ideas came up from long and deep discussions. Positively
built with this experience, as observing changes inside security of firmware and
computer architecture, we couldn’t miss the opportunity and decided to organize
Qubes OS 'minisummit', edition 2020. We want to share our knowledge and our
experience around topics presented below hoping, that once more, we go far
beyond the agenda. This year, we will stand side by side with Frédéric Pierret
and Marek Marczykowski-Górecki from [QubesOS](https://www.qubes-os.org/team),
covering the following topics:

* 20.05
  1. Michał Żygowski Qubes OS on modern AMD platform
    * [recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rw7rAPPyPPc&t=31s)
  2. Norbert Kamiński Status fwupd/LVFS support for Qubes OS
    * [recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o_IdERo3aiE&t=984s)
  3. AMA session
    * [recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BSGUcW6QDYU&t=1509s)

* 28.05
  1. Piotr Król SRTM for Qubes OS VMs
    * [recording](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eip5Rts6S2I&t=2s)
  2. Michał Żygowski Anti Evil Maid for modern AMD UEFI-based platform
    * [recording](https://youtu.be/rM0vRi6qABE?t=3)
  3. AMA session
    * [recording](https://youtu.be/rM0vRi6qABE?t=1904)

* 04.06
  1. Piotr Król DRTM for Qubes OS VMs
  2. Michał Żygowski Anti Evil Maid for Intel coreboot-based platform
  3. AMA session

* 10.06
  1. Frédéric Pierret: How to build Qubes? From components to operating system
overview
  2. Marek Marczykowski-Górecki Operating system testing, when it itself uses
  virtual machines
  3. AMA session

An introductory presentation will open 3mdeb and Qubes OS discussion about the
topic followed by chat discussion, from which prelegents will choose the most
interesting questions to answer. After main presentations, listed in agenda, we
will start AMA related to given day theme, also presented in agenda. We hope
that the most promising presentations will be transformed into community
supported, commercial or publicly founded projects.

## Where to link the event?

We are going to stream transmission via OBS on our YouTube 3mdeb channel. All
you need to do is joining our
[live](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC_djHbyjuJvhVjfT18nyqmQ/live) in an
appropriate time: all data details you will find below. Minisummit starts right
next Wednesday, so the opening presentation goes on the 20th of May at 4:00PM
(CEST+2:00), after which we start AMA related to day theme.

![QubesOs](/img/qubesos.png)

### Whom will you meet?

Prelections will be held by the team of 3mdeb experts who will share their
knowledge and experience discussing AMD SEV and fwupd/LVFS, RTMs in Qubes OS
VMs. Among them are Piotr Król, founder and Embedded Systems Consultant at
3mdeb, Michał Żygowski, 3mdeb core developer of coreboot, maintainer of Braswell
SoC, PC Engines, Protectli and Libretrend platforms and Norbert Kamiński, Junior
Embedded Systems Engineer focused on Linux embedded systems. Qubes OS testing
and development will be widely presented by Qubes core developers, Marek
Marczykowski-Górecki Project lead in QubesOS, specialized in everything Xen /
Linux related and Frédéric Pierret, General packaging, CentOS and Fedora
templates maintainer.

### Why Qubes OS?

To gain security of an open-source quality.

> There is not enough synergy between firmware and operating systems world,
especially in the light of heavy use of isolation mechanisms like
(nested-)virtualization or cgroups. Co-organizing this event with Qubes OS we
would like to build awareness about opportunities that open collaboration can
bring to community through correct leveraging of modern platform security
features. We hope this activity may convince silicon vendors and their
OEM/ODM, that putting more effort in contribution to open source projects has
not only ethical implications, but brings better economical results through
wider and faster adoption of new hardware. In recent years open-source and
security community proven many times its effectivness in after-market product
suppport and discovering inefficiencies and security issues in the hardware
design.

> -- <cite>Piotr Król</cite>

>  Because modern software is very complex and it is unrealistic to have it
 bug-free, isolation is the only practical way to mitigate security issues. At
 Qubes OS we try to provide the strongest possible isolation, while preserving
 usability of the system user interface.

 > -- <cite>Marek Marczykowski-Górecki</cite>

### Why you should join?

To gain practical, valuable first-hand knowledge and meet experts who are happy
to answer intriguing questions and share their passion without creating any
marketing pitch.

>I'm excited about upcoming Qubes OS minisummit, happening thanks to 3mdeb
folks. There will be many interesting topics presented by competent people. And
also a lot of potential for further collaboration!

> -- <cite>Marek Marczykowski-Górecki</cite>

## Summary

We are all waiting for Qubes OS minisummit 2020 where the 3mdeb experts will
cover topics related with status fwupd/LVFS support, SRTM and DTRM for Qubes OS
and Anti Evil Maid for Intel coreboot-based platform. Qubes OS specialists will
tell us how to build and test operating system that uses virtual machines. Every
discussion will end with Q&A session where participants will have the
opportunity to join discussion. At this point, awaiting for the event, we want
to thank both the experts who will devote their time to sharing knowledge and
experience, but also the participants of the event, passionate about Qubes OS

If you think we can help in improving Qubes OS support for your hardware, help
you with Qubes OS certification on firmware level or you looking for someone who
can boost your product by leveraging advanced features of used hardware
platform, feel free to [book a call with
us](https://calendly.com/3mdeb/consulting-remote-meeting) or drop us
[email](mailto:contact@3mdeb.com). If you are interested in similar content feel
free to [sign up to our newsletter](http://eepurl.com/gfoekD)
