---
title: 'How L4 Genode hypervisor stands against proprietary RTOS solution'
abstract: 'A microkernel is a minimal computer operating system kernel which
provides no operating system services at all, only the mechanisms needed
to implement such services. A concept is tolerated inside the μ-kernel only if
moving it outside the kernel would prevent the implementation of the system’s
required functionality. In this article we will show our considerations on using
L4 microkernels on VM.'
cover: /covers/genode.jpg
author: krystian.hebel
layout: post
published: true
date: 2020-01-10
archives: "2020"

tags:
  - microkernel
  - virtualization
categories:
  - OS Dev

---

## L4 microkernels

Recently we've had an idea to create a hypervisor managing 2 virtual machines
each one running simultaneously. One VM should run an RTOS and second a simple
application performing calculations. This article is about considerations on
using L4 microkernels on VM in such project.

```bash
 A concept is tolerated inside the μ-kernel only if moving it outside the
 kernel, i.e. permitting competing implementations, would prevent the
 implementation of the system’s required functionality.

                                                           J. Liedtke
```

Because of that rule microkernels implement only address spaces, threads and IPC
(inter-process communication). Everything else is implemented in user space,
which simplifies kernel code base at the cost of more context switches (e.g.
drivers cannot talk with devices directly, they must do this by a call to the
kernel for every I/O and device memory access). This level of abstraction gives
every subsystem only the minimum amount of rights, adhering to the Principle Of
Least Authority (POLA).

Advantages of microkernels:

- modularity - functionality can be added without changes to the kernel itself,
- security - POLA, address spaces are isolated by the kernel,
- robustness - simple code base, easy to test and review, drivers are
  implemented mainly in user space so bad driver cannot directly crash the
  kernel

Disadvantages:

- performance - more context switches between kernel and user space, especially
  for drivers
- complex process management
- as kernel itself is very simple, application usually must implement key
  components or ensure that another application implements it and communicate
  with that second application. This generates even more context switches.

## Genode

[Genode](https://genode.org/) is an Operating System Framework. It is built from
[components](https://genode.org/documentation/components) which can be anything
from device drivers to user applications. Genode defines API that applications
must use to communicate with kernel.

There are many kernels in L4 family. Genode can use some of them by using
`KERNEL=...` flag for `make`. Prerequisites for building Genode are listed in
[getting started](https://genode.org/documentation/developer-resources/getting_started)
section, but it might not be complete (e.g. `sel4` kernel requires some
additional Python modules). The most complete and reliable source about Genode
is
[Genode Foundation book](https://genode.org/documentation/genode-foundations/index)
.

### seL4

This kernel can be build with:

```bash
make KERNEL=sel4 BOARD=pc run/demo
```

Unfortunately, kernel seems to hang or stuck in loop in QEMU with black screen
and output on serial port ending with:

```bash
[init -> drivers -> fb_drv] fb mapped to 0xb000000
[init -> drivers -> fb_drv] using video mode: 1024x768@16
[init -> drivers -> fb_drv] using buffered output
```

This state didn't change for more than 30 minutes, so it isn't result of slow
emulation. No tests were done on hardware platform.

[seL4 manual](https://sel4.systems/Info/Docs/seL4-manual-latest.pdf) mentions
use of virtualization. From this document it appears that VMX can be used for
treating each thread as a separate VM. The thread itself runs `seL4_VMEnter()`
syscall, which means it must be aware of VMX support (and of course of specific
kernel API). Such thread is both the VMM and VM.

Control over VMX is limited so it couldn't break the rest of the system. I.e.
the uses of external interrupt exiting, EPT and I/O ports bitmap are forced, so
VM cannot monopolize CPU time or control resources outside of its permitted
address space. These limitations are common to all L4 kernels as a consequence
of POLA.

### NOVA

NOVA is an OS virtualization architecture. It consists of two distinct parts.
First one is microhypervisor, which is a privileged layer of virtualization, it
is responsible for isolation and communication mechanisms. The other part runs
in user-level environment, this piece is called VMM and it is _not_ a part of
hypervisor in NOVA's language. This might be different from other definitions of
those terms. For more information see
[this paper](http://hypervisor.org/eurosys2010.pdf). It also contains some
general information about device virtualization and benchmark results.

Following the microkernel approach, the NOVA microhypervisor provides the three
basic abstractions:

- Address spaces isolating processes are called Protection Domains (PD),
- Threads are formed by Execution Contexts (EC) and Scheduling Contexts (SC),
- Inter-process communication is established via Portals.

VMM is the part that defines virtualization level of NOVA. It can be a faithful
virtualization (where unmodified guest OS is run as Genode subsystem) via
VirtualBox for most OSes or via Seoul VMM for Linux-based guests. Other VMMs
might have better performance due to paravirtualization (by reducing required
number of VM exits), but these require support from the guest OSes.

### Summary

One of the VMs in original idea was supposed to be a complete RTOS, delivered in
binary form. As such, it would be very difficult (if not impossible) to port
this to run as an application under L4 kernel. Because of that we couldn't use
seL4, even though it is a good option if one starts such project from scratch.

NOVA is better suited for such uses. For Linux-like OS Seoul can be used as a
VMM, for other systems choose VirtualBox. If OS has working drivers, other
options with paravirtualization can be used for achieving better performance
while keeping low size of VMM.

If you think we can help in improving the security of your firmware or you
looking for someone who can boost your product by leveraging advanced features
of used hardware platform, feel free to
[book a call with us](https://cloud.3mdeb.com/index.php/apps/calendar/appointment/n7T65toSaD9t) or
drop us email to `contact<at>3mdeb<dot>com`. If you are interested in similar
content feel free to [sign up for our newsletter](https://3mdeb.com/subscribe/3mdeb_newsletter.html)
