---
title: Thoughts around OSFC 2020 – day 1
abstract: 'Lets share some thoughts that evolved during the OSFC 2020 talks and
send kudos to many people who made this conference happen.'
cover: /covers/OSFC.png
author:
  - kamila.banecka
  - piotr.krol
layout: post
published: true
date: 2020-12-21
archives: "2020"

tags:
  - event
  - open-source
categories:
  - Firmware
  - Security

---

This year we've again had double track insight into the
[Open Source Firmware Conference](https://osfc.io/) as both participants and
presenters. We want to share some thoughts that evolved during the talks and
send kudos to many people who made this conference happen, starting with
[9elements Cyber Security](https://9esec.io) for gathering crucial voices of
contributors from various firmware community corners. In this short, blogpost
series, we will leave a few notes on every attended presentation, starting from
day 1, according to the [schedule](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/schedule/) with
references and sources. You can go through the post or skip to the chosen
conference. Remember, presented descriptions are only our humble opinion, not
official statements of presenters. To watch the full video and get your own
opinion, click the chosen title.

### Day 1

#### [Why LVFS is Essential for OEMs](https://vimeo.com/488137809)

##### by [Richard Hughes](https://twitter.com/hughsient)

The Linux Vendor Firmware Service, an essential part of the Linux ecosystem, is
worth digging in. It allows its users to keep hardware up to date with firmware
updates. We appreciate enormous work Richard did for the community, and the
success he achieved in convincing vendors. The firmware became living software,
no more part of the hardware. Now we are waiting for fwupd for QubesOS. Thanks,
[Red Hat](https://www.osfc.io/2019/talks/introducing-the-linux-vendor-firmware-service/).

[3mdeb – official LVFS consultant](https://fwupd.org/lvfs/docs/consulting) also
contributes to LVFS:

- [flashrom plugin](https://opensource.3mdeb.com/projects/fwupd.html) - Artur
  Raglis
- [fwupd for QubesOS](https://github.com/3mdeb/qubes-fwupd) -
  [Norbert Kamiński](https://twitter.com/asiderr/)
- fwupd for BSD - approved by NLNet and work in progress on our side

#### [UEFI compliance testing](https://vimeo.com/488138727)

##### by [Heinrich Schuchardt](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/RXDBSA/)

Based on the UEFI lifetime in the presentation it seems that Heinrich and U-Boot
developers are interested in ARM and RISC-V support. Great insight for the
presentation would be UEFI SCT compliance across various UEFI implementations
for various platforms (QEMU, x86, RISC-V). Kudos to
[U-Boot](https://github.com/u-boot/u-boot) for reporting status of UEFI
validation and problems that we may experience when using UEFI Forum recommended
tools.

#### [coreboot Thermal Management on Intel based systems](https://vimeo.com/488143663)

##### [Sumeet Pawnikar](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/NTVYJH/)

##### [Timothy Wawrzynczak](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/YZBZFU/)

Intel works on this contribution to enable efficient thermal management for
Google Chromebooks. It is an important topic for all types of devices,
especially those focused on energy saving, e.g. mobile platforms. The presenters
discussed the added ACPI code and explained the code tree with its structure.
This is significantly important because DPTF thermal management is used across
many laptop devices, not only Chromebooks. Furthermore, the authors mentioned
that they removed many duplicated files and code in favour of unification of the
implementation. Also they made it more usable by removing hard to understand
ACPI code and reducing the amount of code that platform must include.

#### [Bootling Linux more safely with safeboot](https://vimeo.com/488144473)

##### by [Trammell Hudson](https://twitter.com/qrs)

Trammel, the founder, and contributor of safeboot, presented a great, practical
talk around configuring UEFI Secure Boot tools. He explained safeboot
configuration options, the threat model, and interestingly described attestation
before accessing model (e.g. Google account, Lastpass account etc.) Thanks
Trammel for your work [safeboot](https://safeboot.dev/).

#### [PRM: SMM Goes on a Diet](https://vimeo.com/488136678)

##### by [Michael Kubacki](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/9DMPTB/)

PRM stands for Platform Runtime Mechanism and is designed to reduce the
privileged SMM mode code. Certain SMI handlers are moved to PRM modules which
operating system may call to handle an event. A few noticeable facts:

- some hardware resources can only be accessed in SMM
- RAS relies on SMM and SMI handlers
- UEFI Capsule Update and Authenticated Variables also leverage that mode
- SMM is related to OCP and server use cases

This talk reminded us concept proposed by
[Ron at the European coreboot Conference 2017](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6GEaw4msq6g).

#### [Building an alternative ecosystem to UEFI](https://vimeo.com/488136082)

##### by [John Looney](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/AHQ8TJ/)

This was one of the most important presentations during conference since it can
be understood without much knowledge about firmware and gives clear signal that
something is wrong even from perspective of reasonably big company.

John presented typical stages of hardware production (Prototype -> EVT -> DVT ->
PVT -> Mass production) in light of problems with firmware ecosystem. One thing
is that Silicon Vendors, ODM and IBVs don't care about outdated hardware and
outdated for them usually means it already was released to the market.
Coincidentally it means solid enough to be deployed on server market customers
site. Current ecosystem rushing through roadmap to meet stakeholders criteria
and customers are left with whatever sub-optimal software stack was produced.
Second there is no code code share in UEFI ecosystem. Interesting thing about
Facebook build system is full representation (JSON) of every firmware component
with hash - this means at least basic software supply chain control, which is
critical for stable firmware maintenance. Facebook already coach hardware
engineers to develop coreboot code. According to Facebook: it's 2x faster to
enable complex security features on coreboot than UEFI. Good to hear that!
Interesting thing is that Facebook use 1000 reboots to test DRAM init, what in
fact is interesting and we all should get to the point where this number of
iterations works seamlessly on any DRAM configuration.

#### [System Transparency and it's bootloader implementation stboot](https://vimeo.com/488128723)

##### by [Jens Drenhaus](https://twitter.com/jens_drenhaus)

Jens showed us the details of System Transparency's bootloader implementation,
focusing on stboot LinuxBoot distribution. He described the state development,
issues and deployment scenarios with swtpm testing and D-RTM (Intel version) use
case for system provisioning with tboot. In light of 3mdeb involvement in
TrenchBoot project this is definitely very interesting and since we heard
decision about sticking to tboot instead of adopting TrenchBoot we would be glad
to talk more about reasons behind that decision. Also we really like
introduction of swtpm, which we discussed during 2020 Qubes OS mini-summit in
light of [S-RTM](https://youtu.be/Eip5Rts6S2I) and
[D-RTM](https://youtu.be/Eip5Rts6S2I).

#### [kexec based bootloaders/fast rebooting: Boon or Bane](https://vimeo.com/488150148)

##### by [Bhupesh Sharma](https://twitter.com/bhupesh_sharma)

kexec based bootloaders are becoming a very popular and kexec itself are very
capable (can boot Linux, Windows, Xen and more). kexec still is not robust,
there is still a threat of DMA occurrence during kexec kernel loading. Not all
Linux drivers are kexec-ready, they need a shutdown method to avoid undesired
DMA and be relaunched correctly in new kernel.

#### [Unit testing coreboot](https://vimeo.com/488135518)

##### by [Jan Dąbroś](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/T7TMMD/)

Interesting presentation on the coreboot unit testing infrastructure with the
use of cmocka framework. Jan showed the benefits, implementation details, tests
build/run and the overall challenges. It looks like Google decided to have unit
testing in coreboot and they selected for that job fellow Polish developers, so
congratulations to [Semihalf](https://www.linkedin.com/company/semihalf/) for
entering the coreboot land and we wish them lot of successful contributions.

#### [Guiding Engineering Teams Toward a More Secure Usage of U-Boot](https://vimeo.com/488134063)

##### by [Jon Szymaniak](https://twitter.com/sz_jynik)

NCC Group presented its definition of Secure Boot (BSP), U-Boot usage, and its
supply chain. Jon showed us a toolkit built for U-Boot security issues, and it's
functionality. Thank you [NCC Group](https://www.nccgroup.com/us/) for
delivering, as always, high-quality content in the area of embedded systems and
embedded firmware security.

Thanks for getting here! We hope that you have found our summary helpful in
exploring tech news within the firmware world. In the next blogpost we will
present some thoughts on OSFC 2020 day 2.

![osfc](/img/osfc.png)

## Summary

If you think we can help in improving the security of your firmware or you are
looking for a training that can boost your team of developers inside UEFI,
coreboot or Yocto area, feel free to [book a call with
us](https://cloud.3mdeb.com/index.php/apps/calendar/appointment/n7T65toSaD9t) or
drop us email to `contact<at>3mdeb<dot>com`. If you are interested in similar
content feel free to [sign up for our
newsletter](https://3mdeb.com/subscribe/3mdeb_newsletter.html)
