---
title: Thoughts on OSFC 2020 – day 2 and 3
abstract: 'Lets share some thoughts that evolved during the OSFC 2020 talks and
send kudos to many people who made this conference happen.'
cover: /covers/OSFC.png
author: kamila.banecka
layout: post
published: true
date: 2021-04-14
archives: "2021"

tags:
  - firmware
  - event
  - OpenSource

categories:
  - Firmware
  - IoT
  - Miscellaneous
  - OS Dev
  - App Dev
  - Security
  - Manufacturing

---
### Day 2

## Intro

In previous post we have presented some thoughts that evolved during the OSFC
2020 day 1. If you haven't read the previous part, we recommend you to do so,
because this post is a continuation of our shares around day 2 and 3. Remember,
presented descriptions are only our humble opinion, not official statements of
presenters. To watch the full video and get your own opinion, click the chosen
title.  

* [Marvell Octeon TX2 CN913x fully open source
  firmware](https://vimeo.com/488149573) by [Marcin
  Wojtas](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/UY88NG/)

Marcin explained how to port edk2 for Armada8k allowed for being adapted on new
platforms and presented firmware development goals for high-end ARM-based
hardware (SBSA/SBBR, SystemReady ES), as it provides a sufficient interface to
boot most operating systems (Fedora, Debian, Centos, FreeBSD, OpenBSD and
VMware). During the discussion after the presentation, we realized that boards
based on Marvel Armada 8k like [SolidRun ClearFog
8k](https://www.solid-run.com/embedded-networking/marvell-armada-family/clearfog-gt-8k/)
or [Marvell MACCHIATObin](http://macchiatobin.net/) are S-CRTM (aka Secure Boot
aka Verified Boot) capable. In 2021 we definitely want to look more into that.
FOSDEM 2021 talk from Maciej can be a good excuse ["Overview of Secure Boot
state in the ARM-based
SoCs"](https://fosdem.org/2021/schedule/event/tee_arm_secboot/)

* [An open-source SPDM implementation for secure device
  communication](https://vimeo.com/488130792) by [Jiewen
  Yao](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/YMDVAF/), [Xiaoyu
  Ruan](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/RPMDGJ/)

Interesting talk about Security Protocol and Data Model standard (1.0 and 1.1)
and openspdm with it's design and specification. Explicitly presented
communication between Requester and Responder, Transport Layer Binding, and
features, finished with demo covering init connection, challeng/auth, session
creation and secured message. We recognize SPDM as an important part of Platform
Firmware Resiliency as described in [NIST 800-193](TBD). We would love to dive
deeper, but the tight schedule keeps us away from this technology. Maybe 2021
can bring commercial projects related to that matter.

* [POWER9 support in coreboot](https://vimeo.com/488133382) by [Michał
  Żygowski](https://twitter.com/_miczyg_) and [Piotr
  Król](https://twitter.com/pietrushnic)

The talk proudly held by our team. It described the plans of porting the POWER9
architecture to coreboot along with Talos II and Talos II Lite machines. We also
presented details of coreboot port for POWER9 will covering hostboot, skiboot
and petitboot and how they fit into coreboot firmware model. We have briefly
described use cases, the project's development roadmap, the next steps within
[Dasharo](dasharo.com) project, seamless integration of Intel FSP or AMD AGESA
with UEFI-compliant and legacy OS interface.
[Contributions](https://opensource.3mdeb.com/projects/coreboot.html). For those
who want to dive deeper, or join the forces we hold a community call every 2
weeks about port progress and publish minutes
[here](https://pad.riseup.net/p/r.bf2bf1fac6cac16bc23e38b77a5ac7eb).

* [Trusted Execution Environment on OpenBMC](https://vimeo.com/488146312) by
  [Vernon Mauery](https://twitter.com/vmauery), [Zhikui
  Ren](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/SVSWZA/)

BMC firmware for Intel. Interested improvements for ipmi password, ARM security
(TEE) for protecting the password, and initial secret and safe/trusted execution
environment. Widely discussed hardware requirements, boot requirements, and
other prerequisites that are necessary for secure storage on the BMC. Presenters
showed also planned improvements and the next steps of the development. 3mdeb,
despite being proficient in Yocto, as the official [Yocto
Participants](https://www.yoctoproject.org/ecosystem/participants/) have a hard
time to enter BMC development. Maybe OpenPOWER or some Dasharo Server projects
will bring our Embedded Linux expertise to the OSF world.

* [AMD's Journey towards Open Source OpenBMC firmware](https://vimeo.com/488132697)
  by [Supreeth Venkatesh](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/RSCYCX/)

The talk went through the main features implemented in meta-amd for OpenBMC,
enabling it on AMD customer reference boards and upstream support for AMD system
interfaces. Very detailed and exciting journey. Kudos to
[AMD](https://www.amd.com/en) for your work. Definitely worth to mention at
FOSDEM 2021 ["Open Source Firmware status on AMD platforms
2021"](https://fosdem.org/2021/schedule/event/firmware_osfsoap2/) talk.

* [Introducing open firmware development model for the Programmable Service
  Engine's in Intel Atom x6000E Series](https://vimeo.com/488148045) by [Loo
  Tung Lun](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/8DGVWR/)

Session described Internal CPU based on ARM Cortex M7 core, introduced in
Elkhart Lake. Mentioned iotg-fbu to support PSE development. Overall, the
presenters showed how to develop and customize the PSE firmware for Intel
platform, by explaining the mechanisms of PSE firmware and system boot firmware
cooperation with the open source software tools for integration and development.
For the OSF community this is definitely a technology to worry about - another
weird processing unit as part of our platform. From a business point, feature
can be beneficial for various embedded use cases, where remote access is huge
problem.

* [Open Source firmware testing with ConTest](https://vimeo.com/488148599) by
  [Christian Walter](https://twitter.com/nablahero), [Andrea
  Barberio](@insomniacslk)

The presenters described ConTest - a modular framework aimed at automating
system testing workflows and building board-specific testing infrastructure on
top of it. It is an interesting project co-organized by Facebook + 9elements,
presenting ConTest as a major framework for OCP (Scenario OCP Deltalake). What
is very important about this presentation that it tries to highlight the effort
of creating a validation framework and services for OSF community. 3mdeb will
definitely take part in that especially that we have long-standing (5+ years) of
experience with firmware validation, which we productize as part of [Dasharo
Compatibility module](https://dasharo.com/pages/learn.html). Kudos for sharing!


* [pure open source on an AMD Zen](https://vimeo.com/488147337) by [Ronald g.
  Minnich](https://twitter.com/coreboot)

Very Rust talk dedicated to the project X aimed at existing binary blobs from
the x86 part of Zen CPUs. Ron presented oreboot on the AMD Fam17h. He discussed
the main problem of the Open System Firmware requirement for buildable,
installable, redistributable firmware, the approaches to it, and the next steps.

Some of the key points of that are:

1. Not everyone can get/borrow AMD EPYC CRB
2. There are some hw platforms on market, but are those without vendor lock-in?
3. Also expensive for OSF vendor without justified business
4. Code initializes minimal set of low-speed interfaces to boot Linux
5. To fully utilize platform using OSF there is way more work, which probably
   would be hard to do without correct™ coordination

More information can be found in the [FOSDEM'21 3mdeb's presentation](https://fosdem.org/2021/schedule/event/firmware_osfsoap2/attachments/slides/4669/export/events/attachments/firmware_osfsoap2/slides/4669/Open_Source_Firmware_status_on_AMD_platforms_2021.pdf)
and [Reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/Amd/comments/kfqni7/osfc_2020_open_source_firmware_conference_pure/ggmqd8j/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3).

* [Linuxboot on HPE platform where do we stand](https://vimeo.com/488143135) by
  [Jean-Marie Verdun](https://twitter.com/@vejmarie)

The important status of the project that aims at porting LinuxBoot on HPE
platforms. A brief description of a live demo with the approached challenges,
proof of concept, and next steps. What seems to be interesting HPE seems to
provide LinuxBoot-enabled Facebook servers – "private customer." Thanks
[HPE](https://www.hpe.com/us/en/home.html) for the status.

* [TrenchBoot DRTM features for AMD platforms](https://vimeo.com/488140434) by
  [Michał Żygowski](https://twitter.com/_miczyg_) and [Piotr
  Król](https://twitter.com/pietrushnic)

The second talk of our team describing the progress of the
[TrenchBoot](https://opensource.3mdeb.com/projects/trenchboot.html) project.
Overall status, added features and 3mdeb support development for the AMD Secure
Startup. Presenters described the most key changes introduced into the project:
the DRTM event log and the possibility to boot Xen Hypervisor with measured
launch. Interestingly there was a quite long discussion with
[Eugene](https://www.platformsecuritysummit.com/2018/speaker/myers/) and
[Jeremiah](linkedin.com/in/bluescreen/) about the importance of open-source
implementation of D-RTM that works across the platforms. More to that we
received information that open-sourcing [AMD SMM
Supervisor](https://community.amd.com/t5/amd-business-blog/amd-and-microsoft-secured-core-pc/ba-p/418204#:~:text=AMD%20SMM%20Supervisor%20resides%20in,SMM%20code%20at%20run%20time)
is planned.

### Day 3

* [oreboot status report](https://vimeo.com/488139577) by Ryan O'Leary, [Ronald
  g. Minnich](https://twitter.com/coreboot)

oreboot is a downstream fork of coreboot, with all C removed, and all code
written in Rust. Since we spoke of oreboot a year ago, a lot has happened, and
we want to go over the status.

We've got a few interesting facts:

* oreboot works on booting TockOS (Rust)
* it can be tried on QEMU
* works with OpenTITAN chips (FPGA)

Another great project, which we would happy to triage if only there would be
enough resources in our pocket.

* [Zephyr as an open platform for Google's embedded
  controllers](https://vimeo.com/488150463) by [Paul
  Fagerburg](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/ZZDUXC/), [Jack
  Rosenthal](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/H3RYF8/)

Interesting facts about the benefits of moving to a community-driven RTOS
instead of using our custom kernel, presentation of ChromiumOS Embedded
Controller and information about google plans in contributing to Zephyr OS. This
is definitely a big deal for us since we are engaged in Zephyr OS-based IoT
firmware development for quite some time. You can check our blog posts about it
[here](https://blog.3mdeb.com/tags/zephyr/). We looking for a commercial
assignment that involves Zephyr-based EC.

* [Arm SystemReady and the UEFI firmware ecosystem](https://vimeo.com/488131661)
  by [Samer El-Haj-Mahmoud](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/3DPRVF/), [Dong
  Wei](https://cfp.osfc.io/osfc2020/speaker/8FY7QG/)

The Arm SystemReady (Arm SR) program was explained in the first half of the
presentation. It is an extension of the Arm ServerReady program that tries to
describe a new set of standards and a compliance certification program which
goal is to make standard OSes and hypervisors "just work" on ARM devices. The
program is based on a set of minimum hardware requirements (BSA), firmware
requirements (BBR), and certification requirements (ACS). The second half of the
presentation shows how the SystemReady certification can be achieved using open
source projects such as TF-A, TianoCore or U-Boot. The lesson ended with the
presentation of devices that have already received the Arm SR certification
(e.g. RPi4 - Arm SR ES certified) or whose certification is in progress (e.g.
NXP LS1046A FRWY/RDB).

Just a few keynotes:

* BBR consist of in SBBR (Server BBR), EBBR (embedded BBR) and LBBR (using
  LinuxBoot)
* additional BBSR (BaseBoot Secure Requirements) which is for secure boot and
  firmware update
* there is no ISV ecosystem that Arm endorse for certification

## Summary

We, in 3mdeb, believe in Freedom and Open Source Software (FOSS) that is why it
was a both a pleasure and honor to participate in the project that aims at
changing the way of firmware development, collaboration, and knowledge share.
Thank you, the community for this fruitful meeting and common share of thoughts
and trust.

![osfc](/img/osfc.png)

If you think we can help in improving the security of your firmware or you are
looking for a training that can boost your team of developers inside UEFI,
coreboot or Yocto area, feel free to [book a call with
us](https://calendly.com/3mdeb/consulting-remote-meeting) or drop us email to
`contact<at>3mdeb<dot>com`. If you are interested in similar content feel free
to [sign up to our newsletter](http://eepurl.com/doF8GX)
