---
title: Dasharo Compatible with MSI PRO Z690-A Release v1.1.2
abstract: 'Discover the latest Dasharo v1.1.2 release, designed with you in mind. Enjoy
the freedom to personalize with the new logo customization feature, and flash
open-source firmware safely with Flash BIOS recovery support. Its about making
firmware both fun and secure. Dive in to find out more.'
cover: /covers/msi_pro_z690a.png
author: piotr.krol
layout: post
published: true
date: 2023-09-08
archives: "2023"

tags:
  - dasharo
  - coreboot
  - msi
  - z690
  - alderlake
  - raptorlake
categories:
  - Firmware
  - Security

---

## Introduction

Firstly, thank everyone who contributed to this release, including the Dasharo
community and the Dasharo Team. Your continuous efforts and collaboration have
led to this exciting update. Most improvements coming from [Michał
Żygowski](https://blog.3mdeb.com/authors/michal-zygowski/), [Krystian
Hebel](https://blog.3mdeb.com/authors/krystian-hebel/), [Michał
Kopeć](https://blog.3mdeb.com/authors/michal-kopec/), [Maciej
Pijanowski](https://blog.3mdeb.com/authors/maciej-pijanowski/) and [Sergii
Dmytruk](https://github.com/SergiiDmytruk).

After the last release of v1.1.1 in February 2023, we are back with another
update, v1.1.2 ([release
notes](https://docs.dasharo.com/variants/msi_z690/releases/#v112-2023-09-06)),
bringing several improvements and fixes to enhance the user experience and
system performance. Let's delve into what's new in this release.

## Couple word about versioning strategy

### Dasharo Entry Subscription Releases (DES)

v1.1.2 release is a part of our Dasharo Entry Subscription Releases, a series
we have lovingly created to enhance privacy, security, performance, and
compatibility. Being a subscriber not only grants you early access to the
latest updates but also allows you to actively participate in shaping Dasharo's
journey. It's a small way to say thank you for your trust and support in us. If
you are interested, you can [become a subscriber
here](https://shop.3mdeb.com/product-category/dasharo-entry-subscription/).

We are already channeling our energies towards the next release,
[v1.1.3](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/milestone/12), nurturing it
with more improvements and refinements.

### Dasharo Community Releases (DCR)

But worry not if a subscription is not for you! We are equally committed to our
broader community. We have the Dasharo Community Releases lined up, which are
built and published annually, offering a compilation of the features and fixes
introduced in the Dasharo Entry Subscription Releases. The next in line is the
v1.2.0 release, a milestone we are eagerly working towards. To stay updated
with the latest community releases, feel free to subscribe to our [free mailing
list](https://newsletter.3mdeb.com/subscription/aKgTJjYEA).

We are here because of your support and faith in us. Each release, including
v1.1.2, is a step towards a more secure, user-friendly more trustworthy
firmware solution, a journey we are proud to have you be a part of. Thank you
for being with us in this adventure!

### Key Changes in the New Release

Over the past few months, we have been diligently working to address issues
reported by the community and introduce new features to enhance the firmware's
functionality. Here are the critical updates:

## Added

### [MSI FlashBIOS Recovery Support](https://docs.dasharo.com/unified/msi/recovery/#using-msi-flashbios-button)

For coreboot hackers and enthusiasts who are apprehensive about bricking their
hardware while flashing open-source firmware, the MSI FlashBIOS Recovery
Support comes as a reassuring feature. It practically eliminates the risk of a
permanent brick, offering a straightforward recovery pathway in case of BIOS
corruptions, as detailed in our documentation. This feature, demonstrated
following video, ensures that you can experiment and optimize without the
looming fear of losing your hardware functionality. It's a safety net that
encourages exploration while maintaining system integrity, truly a boon for the
open-source firmware community.

{{< youtube iTkXunUAriE >}}

Of course that means some microcontroller sitting on the mainboard under
certain circumstances have access to specific USB port, can read filesystem and
flash BIOS SPI. That microcontroller does not run open-source firmware yet and
potentially could be leveraged by attacker with ability of update it or having
physical access. The only reasonable protection in that situation for Intel
platforms is Intel Boot Guard with owner keys fused in chipset.

### Raptor Lake-S CPU Support

We've started to add support for the upcoming Raptor Lake-S CPUs in Dasharo.
This update, highlighted in our [GitHub issue #130](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/130),
is a straightforward response to the tech community's growing interest in the
latest CPUs. It's a simple step to help Dasharo users upgrade smoothly when
they decide so. Thank's to this feature we stay at bleeding edge of devices
supported by coreboot.

### MSI ACPI Device and Automatic Driver and Utility Installation Manager

The integration of the MSI ACPI device in Dasharo triggers the automatic driver
and utility installation manager, a feature that promises to simplify the setup
process for users. As demonstrated in the following video, this tool guides
users step-by-step to effortlessly install and set up the necessary drivers and
utilities, removing the hassle of manual installations. It's a practical
addition to Dasharo, aimed at making the initial setup process smoother and
more user-friendly, especially for those taking their first steps in the
open-source firmware environment. It also prove that Dasharo and open-source
firmware is not only for Linux users but also can be leveraged by Windows users
in easy any smooth way without compatibility issues.

{{< youtube K-v-veV_jvI >}}

### Support for Logo Customization

Dasharo now offers a feature that many users will find delightful - the ability
to customize the logo displayed during the boot process. As outlined in our
[guide](https://docs.dasharo.com/guides/logo-customization/), users can now
replace the existing logo with a design of their choice, adding a personal
touch to their system. Whether it's a fun image, a brand logo, or a personal
design, this feature allows users to infuse their personality into their
firmware, making the boot process a bit more enjoyable and unique to each
individual.

### UEFI 2.8 Errata C Compliance in EDKII Fork

![UEFI Logo](/img/368px-Logo_of_the_UEFI_Forum.svg.png)

In the v1.1.2 release, we have updated Dasharo to be compliant with the UEFI
2.8 Errata C specification, released in January 2021, a standard that dictates
how the firmware communicates with the operating system.

This transition brings a notable enhancement in the firmware's cryptographic
system, introducing support for the SHA-3 hash algorithm, which is known for
its higher security levels compared to its predecessors. It means Dasharo is
now equipped to offer better security, safeguarding your system against more
sophisticated threats and ensuring a safer environment for your data. We are
also closer to most recent UEFI specification version which is 2.10 (released
in August 2022).

### Firmware Update Mode Feature

We've been listening to your feedback, and we understand that the firmware
update process can sometimes be too complex, requiring changes to protection
settings in the BIOS setup, including disabling them before performing an
update. While we aspire to support the UEFI Capsule Update in the future, as
discussed in [this GitHub
issue](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/423), we acknowledge
that it is a complex and time-consuming feature to implement.

To make your life easier in the meantime, we introduce the Firmware Update Mode
in the v1.1.2 release. When this mode is selected, the platform resets and
temporarily disables all firmware protections, including UEFI Secure Boot, for
the duration of one boot. This initiative aims to streamline the update process
for you, removing the need to unset and reset multiple security options, which
can indeed be tiresome. It's a step towards a simpler, more user-friendly
Dasharo experience, with a focus on reducing the hassle involved in the
firmware update process.

![Dasharo Firmware Update Model](/img/dasharo_sec_opts.jpeg)

## Changed

### ME and Microcode Updates: Balancing Stability and Security

At Dasharo, we maintain a cautious approach towards ME updates; while we are
not ardent proponents of frequent ME updates, we acknowledge that they can
sometimes be synonymous with improved stability. Following the silicon vendor
recommendations is a standard practice for us, unless there are substantial and
proven concerns that deter us from doing so. For users who perceive ME as a
potential threat, we offer the flexibility to disable it through the setup menu
options, leveraging either the soft method or the HAP bit, thus putting control
back in your hands - [here are
details](https://docs.dasharo.com/dasharo-menu-docs/dasharo-system-features/#intel-management-engine-options).

The recent microcode updates bring a host of benefits, with a significant focus
on rectifying the vulnerability pinpointed in the [INTEL-SA-00767
advisory](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/security-center/advisory/intel-sa-00767.html).
This advisory highlighted a potential security vulnerability in some Intel®
processors with Intel® Software Guard Extensions (SGX) that could allow
information disclosure through improper isolation of shared resources.
Addressing this, the update fortifies the isolation of shared resources,
substantially reducing the risk of information disclosure through
vulnerabilities. It is a proactive step towards ensuring a safer user
environment, enhancing the security measures in place.

Furthermore, these updates enhance CPU compatibility, promising smoother
performance and broader support for various processors, thereby fostering a
more stable and secure operating environment.

## Fixed

### [NVIDIA RTX 3060 HD Audio Device Issue](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/364)

In previous Dasharo version, people using Dasharo with Windows 11 and a
specific NVIDIA graphics card faced a hiccup - they couldn't get sound to play
through their monitor's speakers. It was a bit of a head-scratcher and
certainly frustrating for those looking forward to enjoying videos, music, or
games with good sound right from their monitor.

With v1.1.2 release you can seamlessly use NVIDIA audio functionalities on
Windows 11.

### [Reset to Defaults with F9](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/355)

In previous release we encounter problem where using the F9 key to reset
settings to their defaults in the Dasharo setup menu actually restored
incorrect settings, disabling several features that should have remained
enabled. We fixed that bug in v1.1.2.

### [Popup Information about Recovery Mode](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/442)

In previous versions of Dasharo we received couple reports regarding an
unexpected popup displaying information about recovery mode appearing after
flashing with a valid binary.

This was due to a discrepancy in how recovery reasons were handled during the
boot process, sometimes triggering a recovery mode even with a proper firmware
flash. Addressing this in the v1.1.2 release, Dasharo has enhanced the
firmware's reliability, ensuring that users will not encounter unexpected
recovery popups under normal circumstances, thereby streamlining the boot
process and enhancing user experience.

### [Watchdog Timeout Value](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/413)

Users reported a problem where changing the chipset watchdog timeout value in
the setup menu did not alter the actual timeout setting; it only updated the
displayed value. This was particularly crucial for systems with a lot of RAM
(e.g. 128GB of DDR5), as the memory training during boot exceeded the default
120-second timeout, leading to a boot loop. Addressing this in the v1.1.2
release, Dasharo has ensured that users can set a timeout value that genuinely
reflects in the system behavior, preventing unnecessary boot loops and
facilitating a smoother startup process, especially for systems with
substantial RAM. This fix enhances user control over system settings, promoting
a more reliable and user-friendly environment.

### Setup Password Option

The addition of the Setup Password option in the Dasharo firmware brings an
extra layer of security to your system. It allows users to set a password that
restricts unauthorized access to the firmware setup, ensuring that only
individuals with the correct password can modify the system settings, thereby
safeguarding the system's configuration and enhancing its security.

### Please be caution when updating Qubes OS workstation

It was noticed that after update there is need for mechanical power off (aka
[ACPI G3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ACPI#Global_states)). After
disconnecting the power please wait until Ethernet led will stop and then
connect again and power. Without that, by just doing reset or power off/on
cycle users may experience very weird behavior in Qubes OS like:

* VMs not starting,
* VMs claiming to start (green light in Qubes manager) but nothing on screen,
* space lock (cotinues space pressed) in dom0 terminal,
* mouse not working,
* flood of NVMe QID timeout in system journal,
* hangs on every command in dom0 terminal,
* and others.

## Conclusion

Each feature in the v1.1.2 release compatible with MSI PRO Z690-A is crafted
with the user's experience at the forefront, aiming to bring value by enhancing
the reliability, security, and user-friendliness of your system. We invite you
to explore these features and experience the tangible benefits they offer in
optimizing your system's performance and safeguarding its operations.

We encourage users to explore these new features and share feedback through
[GitHub issues](https://github.com/Dasharo/dasharo-issues/issues/), or [Dasharo
HCL reports via
DTS](https://docs.dasharo.com/dasharo-tools-suite/documentation/#hcl-report).

We look forward to hearing your experiences with this new release and remain
committed to fostering a collaborative and innovative environment. Thank you
for being a part of the Dasharo Community.
